Hello.
Hi, this is Nick Basbanes.
How are you doing?
All right, thanks.
I'm sorry about that.
The call went straight through and was charged to my phone, which was not what we had in mind.
This doesn't have to concern you, but we just took care of it.
Anyway, I've read your book, and my 14-year-old daughter, who knows computers, has read your book.
Oh, right.
And she read it.
Of course, kids, you know, they read faster than adults, I think.
But anyway, very interesting.
Susan tells me in New York that you just sold another concept to the movies.
Is that right?
I sold another novel.
Another novel, but I guess it's still in progress.
Is that right?
Well, it's...
More or less finished.
I've got a bit of editing left to do.
What's the title of that?
It's called Esau.
How do you spell?
As in the Bible, E-S-A-U.
Oh, you like these biblical names, huh?
Yeah, I can't do that.
You know, I was brought up as a Baptist.
I see.
Briefly, because we're really to talk about the grid, but is Esau kind of a son of Isaac, I wonder, or what?
No, no, it's nothing to do with that.
It's actually the name of a fossil.
Uh-huh.
Oh, boy, you're really doing the time leaps here, aren't you?
Yeah.
No, the Esau is about paleoanthropology.
Say again, what kind of anthropology?
Paleo.
Paleo, okay.
Yeah, to do with human origin.
I see.
It's a contemporary setting?
Yeah, it's a contemporary novel, which is my next novel after The Grid.
Well, I would have thought that your next novel after The Grid would be a sequel.
Uh-huh.
Well, that's... You certainly set yourself up for that, don't you?
Well, yeah.
I don't know.
Oh, come on now.
We're downloading to 100 computers.
Not that I'm going to give this away, but... This is true, but I mean...
I don't know.
I mean, you see, when I first started writing, I wrote three novels featuring one character, Trot, by which I mean one after the other.
And I kind of now prefer to sort of do something completely different every time rather than just repeat the same trick.
It seems to me, as a novelist, that, you know, there are lots and lots of ways you can get bored
with what you're doing.
And it strikes me that the best way to keep interested is to take a few risks.
And the best way to take a few risks is often to write about something about which you know very little.
And come at it fresh and acquaint yourself with the subject.
You have a kind of convert's enthusiasm then.
So I'm not sure I would write a sequel.
I mean, never say never again, but I mean, I don't know if writing sequels... You know, I remember, this is interesting, and we can go in a number of directions with this, but I remember sitting with Michael Crichton in Boston.
oh, however many years ago it was when Jurassic Park came out.
And I remember saying, Michael, you set yourself up here for a sequel.
You've got these velociraptors, you know, trekking off into the wilderness.
Oh, no, no, no.
He said, really?
Well, you know, then, of course, he wrote a sequel.
The difference, of course, is a $660 million gracing film with Steven Spielberg.
It does certainly make you pay attention, doesn't it?
Exactly.
I mean, you know, ask me again if I'm so lucky, you know,
And, of course, the fact is the sequel was very unsatisfying as far as I'm concerned.
The novel?
The novel, yeah.
I think I'd probably go along with you there.
I don't even think I finished it, to be honest with you.
I mean, it just didn't engage me at all.
I think possibly, you know, if the novelist isn't engaged, obviously the reader won't be.
I think this is a problem with a lot of modern fiction,
uh commercial fiction, I mean you know, I think Grisham's problem is, he's really sort of writing the same book. Yeah well Grisham's got a lot of problems as far as i'm concerned. Yeah I mean you know I think because the idea, this is something I've always wanted to avoid. It's like I just want to sort of write things that are going to interest me first, and if I feel if I'm interested then the reader will be too, I hope so uh so you're right. I mean I've moved from
architecture to anthropology.
So I guess I'm moving through here.
Well, I think it's more than architecture.
I think the grid is far more than architecture.
Well, I'm glad you think so.
Thank you.
I mean, do you see it as a cautionary tale, in fact?
Well,
Thought of, yes.
I mean, I sort of think, I mean, I had lots and lots of sort of themes in mind when I was writing it, but not least the sort of lemming-like rush to computerize the world.
I mean, you know, for a long time I felt that the novelists have let science get away from them.
Probably because most of us, most of them don't understand it, you know.
Exactly, yeah, exactly.
And yet, you know, you look back to the beginning of the century and you had people like H.G.
Wells writing novels that actually influenced scientists.
I mean, Leo Szilard, who was one of the nuclear scientists, who was on the Manhattan Project.
How do you spell his name?
S-Z-I-L-A-R-D.
Okay.
He actually read Wells' book, The World Set Free, which was about nuclear weapons.
And Wells wrote this book despite the fact that Rutherford had said that nuclear weapons were impossible.
But when Leo Szilard read Wells' book, he said...
This is possible, and I have to get a group of like-minded people together to get to Einstein and get him to say something to the American president to this effect.
And I thought, well, recently I've been thinking, well, it's almost impossible to imagine something similar happening today, that a novelist could influence a scientist.
And yet...
there is so much popular science around.
In a way, although science has sort of got away from writers and artists, and a gulf has sort of grown up between the two communities, the sort of advent of the popular science book has meant that it's actually quite easy to get a handle on some science and to sort of, in a way, sometimes make science more intelligible to the ordinary reader.
No, I think one thing I like about the grid...
And it has a lot in common with what I really liked about Jurassic Park is that
it's a premise to be sure, but it's a goddamn credible premise. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. I mean you know what Michael did with the DNA hey that's a that's a they say it's far-fetched, but it's a credible, what if you know maybe if you can extract DNA from amber and you can replicate and clone things, well who knows? Yeah now it seems to me that computers are really taking over the world in a very frightening kind of a way, and and you know they're
I have to say, before I read the PW review,
I also felt that, you know, there are resonances here in your book from 2001 to be sure you have the hell computer going to run amok.
And also in a very fine way, the towering inferno or whatever it was, the glass.
Probably more 2001 than that.
But I think for myself more 2001 because really it is the rogue computer here.
But what amuses me in a way is Kubrick's film was 1968 or 69.
And I think computers today, as you're saying, are far more sophisticated in 1996 than they ever imagined they would be in 2001.
I mean, is that a fair assessment?
No, it is.
I mean, that is absolutely true.
And that's, you know, it's the idea that we're swiftly approaching a sort of state when the mathematical philosophers
tell us that the machines will actually invent the transcendent machine, i.e., the ultimate machine.
Basically, when machines are entrusted with their own replication, and we're not so very far away from that now.
Most computers are involved in the manufacture of silicon chips and other computers.
Not only will machines be manufacturing other machines, but also with the internet, there'll be a kind of global link-up.
And so it is...
It is fair to talk about the advent of a global machine, one whole machine, because after all, when all these machines are connected, they will all be linked.
So, you know, it's difficult to imagine what the sort of possible consequences of such a thing might be.
If you have a rogue machine.
Exactly, yeah.
But of course, I mean, the very point of some of these machines is to sort of make human workers redundant.
And the question, it begs the question then, you know, if we get to a stage when the machines are inventing machines and man has virtually nothing to do with it, then what will man be doing?
I mean, just sort of being amused in a corner.
What's happening now?
I don't know if it's happening in England, but I mean, people are highly qualified, educated people are losing their jobs and they're forced to find, you know, service jobs.
Yeah.
Being a fraction of the...
uh the money they earned prior to that, and machines are doing the whole damn thing you know. Well I mean I don't mean to sort of make myself sound like some sort of luddite you know, and I'm coming along smashing sort of spinning jenny uh machines uh in the sort of English cotton mills in the 19th century, but um I do do feel that you know um there is sort of stupidity about a lot of computerization
that, you know, people try and sort of make computers do the jobs that humans can do without actually sort of answering the responsibilities of a society.
You know, what do people do when their jobs have been taken away from them by computers?
And in the novel, you know, the woman who works in the detective's wife who works in a museum, her job has been effectively taken by a compact disc.
And so I kind of think, well...
Do we want to live in a kind of society where the interaction we might have with a museum will only be through a compact disc?
I mean, it isn't much fun.
So why did you pick L.A.?
This could have been anywhere, really, I suppose.
Well, I picked L.A.
for a number of reasons.
There were very practical reasons.
Number one, I mean, L.A.
is... The price of real estate in the downtown area is quite high.
You have to generally build an intelligent building in a place where...
in that kind of place.
Also, the thing about L.A., which appealed to me from the concept of a smart building, was that L.A.
is full of what the architects call defensible architecture.
The idea, I think what Mike Davis has called in his book, City of Courts, fuck you architecture.
I keep off the grass, you know, armed response patrols.
Well, I love the way you set up the, you know, at nighttime where the bums can't even lie down.
I wish I could put some of that stuff up around here, you know.
Well, this is the point, you see.
It's like, you know, all these things sound great until you realize that not only are they keeping people away, but they're keeping you in.
That's right.
So this was the sort of the irony, the sort of the sense of...
fascination with this kind of this kind of world you know and LA of course is the absolute paradigm of this kind of society in which people are frightened. Take a walk take a walk through Grand Central Terminal in New York sometime. Yeah you know that's that's true as well. Well I mean you get out of the Oyster Bar, which is a wonderful little restaurant, and you can actually see through the windows all these people eating at nice crisp tablecloths yeah
Lovely.
And all these bums.
Literally, you could take a beautiful photograph right outside.
The bums lying down in the passageways.
And then it's the people.
Actually, I should do that sometime.
It's an Oliver Twist, isn't it?
Yeah, it really is.
That and a number of other reasons.
you know, why L.A.
sort of appealed, really.
Yeah, but now, clearly, I mean, I know L.A.
pretty well, too.
You seem to have gotten a handle on it and on the culture and the nuances of L.A.
life.
You must have had to spend a bit of time out there.
Well, I'm in and out of L.A.
You know, I've just come back from L.A., actually.
You know, I was there last week speaking to sort of film people.
So, I mean, you know, it's the kind of place that also I think L.A.
is the kind of place that everybody knows.
Because, of course, it's the sort of preeminent cultural model in television.
Half the television series you see are based in L.A.
anyway.
Half the movies you see are in L.A.
So, in fact, I think people in this country and in Europe have a much...
clearer idea of what L.A.
looks like and what it's like to live there, even people who've never been there, than, say, people who live in L.A.
who, you know, be thinking about London.
I mean, people in L.A.
still persist in the misapparantion that London has, you know, pea-souper fogs.
And I, you know, I'm sort of frequently telling people in L.A., even sort of intelligent people, you know, that actually L.A.'s
own fogs are considerably more frequent and more dense than anything they ever have in London.
As I think of it, this book wouldn't work in New York either, uh it just wouldn't it wouldn't work in New York, I don't think. No I don't think, I mean the other thing about downtown of course is it's a sort of you know it has it's full of the sort of this kind of grandiose architecture anyway, but at the same time of course it's completely empty at night, you know it's sort of. See that that's exactly what I'm saying. That wouldn't work in New York there would be a tension in New York. Yeah. People would be alert to what the hell is going on over there you know. Yeah.
So really going back to the premise then, you said an architecture book, and I said, well, I think it's more than that.
Did you see it originally as an architecture book with the computer element thrown in?
I saw it first in terms of the character.
The character being the computer?
The guy who is the architectologist, Ray Richardson, who sort of conceives of the whole thing.
But, you know, the idea that sort of buildings, new buildings are actually sort of have much more in common with kind of spacecraft.
than, you know, even buildings going up 20 years ago.
And I thought also the ego of the character as well was what interested me.
I mean, it's enough of a thrill to see your book on the shelf in a bookstore, but what it must be like to drive past, you know, some great sort of huge building and realize that you've not only designed it, but you built it and everything.
That's really what was one of the sort of prime things that started me off.
I mean, it's very difficult to sort of
ever put your finger on the first thing you thought of.
Is there an echo of Melville, I wonder, where he throws himself into the jaws of the fire at the end?
Yeah, I think you're probably right.
There's a sense of being inside of Wales.
Yeah, it really is.
There's a point there I thought he was going to make it, you know.
You really did knock off everybody, didn't you?
My daughter asked me about that.
I said, well, honey, this is tough.
This machine is one tough machine.
Well, you see, again, it's one that sort of sits back sometimes and you realize that the writer plays God and sometimes your first tendency is to be
is to be merciless.
And then sometimes you draw back and think, well, you know, I'm sentimental, I like these characters.
Well, I mean, we've already figured the scenario.
You've kept Kuretus, you've got the woman that he likes, and you've got a hundred machines now that are going to be sons of Ishmael here, or Isaac, whatever his name is.
And...
fully 90 of them right off the bat aren't going to be able to handle it.
You have to have a setup where you can't turn it off.
That's critical here, the fact that he can defeat anything you throw at him.
He's got supplementary power.
It really is scary.
The other thing that interests me, I'm remembering things as I'm speaking to you half the time.
I started playing a few computer games myself.
And it was the idea of actually, you know, the general fascination that people have in offices playing computer games.
And I thought, well, wouldn't it be nice if the people who were, you know, who were supposed to be working, who were playing computer games, actually turned out to be in a computer game themselves.
And they, you know, they didn't really know it.
That was another thing that sort of... Now, in your mind's eye, is it the circumstance of the boy...
playing his own little games there, what set the machine off, or was it disposed to go to become a serial killer?
Well, I think it seems...
One of the points of the book is that we have to kind of change the way we think about computers.
We have a tendency to sort of anthropomorphize, to humanize computers, to imagine them thinking.
Yeah, but you do that by setting up in the chess game there, you know.
We actually see it, which I think is wonderful, by the way.
I can really see that in the movie.
That'll be a very, very chilling moment when this figure...
No, yeah, that's really spectacular.
But go ahead, I interrupted.
But you anthropomorphize it yourself, I think.
Well, I think, yeah.
I mean, you even give us computer talk.
It's the nature that we do it.
You know, the computers do things, you ask them a question, they give you an answer, and it's quite understandable that we should...
look on it as being a kind of brain.
But of course, you know, in hard mathematical terms, it's nothing like that.
So, you know, to look for a computer having a motive, of course, is incorrect.
That is the great leap, then, that you make here, I guess.
Would you agree with that?
Yes.
Go ahead.
No, I think, I mean, you know, we have to sort of
We have to change our language.
We have to change the way we talk about computers.
I mean, you really do give the computer a motive here.
Well, I give it an apparent motive, yes.
And of course, this is very seductive for human beings.
It is a very...
it is a very seductive thought that a computer will have a motive.
And equally, when you've, I mean, they are already building computers that are equipped with what the computer programmers call an observer illusion.
The sense that the computer has a responsibility and an awareness
of itself, but of course this is just a program. This is just a sort of series of binary instructions, but of course if you give if you endow a machine with this, you know, you encourage it almost to sort of try and you know look look for some answers itself, and I think this is what the sort of um
This is, again, sort of something that one regards as being perhaps slightly sort of hazardous.
And how much did you know about computers prior to undertaking this task?
Well, I mean, like most people, I mean, I can sit down in front of the computer and get on with it and work it.
reasonably well.
I mean, you know, taking it to pieces is a different story.
I think I'm sort of slightly more in touch with the sort of, if you like, the philosophy of computing, which comes through the philosophy of mathematics.
And this is something I sort of was more interested in than, you know, how a computer actually works.
It's how programs actually are
how the sort of profits are telling us that the programs will actually change as the world goes on.
Well, what's the production schedule for the film?
Well, they've already got the script.
Did you write it?
No, I didn't, no.
I have a sort of personal philosophy about
script writing and novels I think. Yeah what if they offer you, this is off the record, what if they offer you two million dollars to write the scripts? You know I mean that's what these guys get sometimes. Uh well yeah I mean they can, I mean they can be often better paid than the novelist. Oh they are. Not often they are. Yeah well I mean I have my own book out there right now too. It's not a novel it's a
You know, we bust our asses to make a very small little royalty on 50,000 books or something like that, you know.
And then some guy comes along and they give him a million and a half bucks or whatever to do a 120-page treatment for a film.
More power to him.
Well, yeah, I mean, I'm a scriptwriter myself.
I mean, I do write scripts.
But not from your own novels.
No, well, you see, I consider the very act of having finished the novel.
It means that in a way I've become, I've reached a point when I don't feel I can go forward with it anymore.
It's like sort of finishing a painting.
You know, I don't feel that, you know, if I then had to sell the painting to someone and they said, well, what we'd like you to do is come in and sort of change this bit and change that bit, then I'd sort of feel, you know,
I'd feel very awkward about doing that.
And often I've found from friends that people who are writers who, you know, they sell their book, they agree to write the screenplay for more money, and they find that the screenplay takes more time than the novel actually in the first place.
So I sort of kind of feel, well, I don't want to go through that.
I've been through it once.
Which case was that?
I wrote a novel called Dead Meat.
which is about the Russian Mafia.
And I then had to turn it into a sort of three-part television series for the BBC.
And in actual fact, it was infinitely more grief to me working on the script than it was actually just writing the novel.
I mean, the novel is...
You're your own master, really.
There's less interference.
I mean, as I say, I enjoy writing screenplays.
I just prefer to come and work on somebody else's rather than my own.
You know, it's like the very things that you need to chuck out and get rid of as a script writer.
How do you visualize yourself as a writer?
I mean, clearly this book, I mean, it's written very visually.
It's exciting.
It's a thriller.
It's undoubtedly written with the idea that a film will be made from it, which I think is wonderful.
I think it'll make a wonderful movie.
Thank you.
And I love movies, and I love thrillers.
I mean, I write a literary column, but, you know, the stuff... I read your book on vacation in Florida two weeks ago.
Susan said, Oh, I'm so happy that the book you took to Florida with you was The Grid.
You know, I could have taken 25 different books, but I wanted to be entertained, you know.
Sure.
Well, I see myself... I mean, I'm glad you think it was entertaining, because I see myself first.
as an entertainer.
I mean, if I think you can do just about anything, you can say just about anything, as long as you've taken the trouble to entertain the reader first.
And this seems to be a rather lamentable tendency amongst writers, certainly in Britain now.
It's a kind of very parochial kind of writing.
It's also a kind of writing that's almost contemptuous.
Well, I mean, you have to apologize for engaging your readers, I guess.
Yeah, and story has become almost...
Irrelevant.
And I feel, well,
You know, that's a shame, but it can only benefit me in the sense that I enjoy entertaining and I enjoy telling a story.
And obviously in Hollywood there is a tremendous appetite for good stories.
Well, a good friend of mine who is so derided by the critics is Pat Conroy.
I love his stuff.
But people look down their noses at him because how could anybody that popular be any good?
I mean,
This is what people think, isn't it?
It's so ridiculous, and I was so amused by that Martin Amis thing last year, you know,
I mean, the poor bastard went out and he actually made some money, you know, and they kick his ass for it, you know.
It's unforgivable, of course, if you come from that milieu, you know, if you come from that very sort of Bloomsbury world of English letters, which sort of is this vein full of money, as you say.
Of course, Martin wants it both ways, too, though.
He still wants to be recognized as the writer of his generation, but, you know,
That's right.
So, I mean, sometimes you have to say about which way it might go, you know, left to right.
You see, I think that also a lot of novels seem to purposely try and make it difficult for the reader.
You know what I mean?
I mean, I think, you know, they just seem to almost set out to make it as hard as possible for the readers to get on with the book.
And I think, well, why?
You know, I mean, there are, you know, I mean, I think it's silly to do that.
You sort of risk, to take risks in losing your readers.
seems counterproductive.
I prefer to sort of try and seduce the reader and get them hooked on the story.
And then at that stage, if you do have the author's message, if you like, that comes along, then let it be sort of at a point when you think the reader has been sufficiently entertained that they want to go on, but that they will stop and pay attention to whatever you have to say.
One little critical point, and I just offer it as an observation.
I have to say, I had trouble with the book keeping the characters straight.
Yeah.
There were a lot of them.
And saying, who the fuck is this one or that one?
You know, I mean... Right.
This is the trouble when you're writing a sort of, you know...
um a multicast story. I mean and of course where it is multicast, uh you do have to characterize them pretty quickly in one paragraph or so, and you tend to forget these things and trying to keep them straight. Now who the hell is this one? I mean uh and I did say I did have to feel, you know I mean Curtis was the guy who does emerge, and yeah uh and Ray of course, and the woman, uh but boy some all of these others
Well, the chess guy was pretty interesting. That's your phone or fax.
But it was pretty interesting.
And, you know, I never found out how it ended up.
Maybe you can tell me.
But a couple of weeks ago, I went out.
I did a tour on the West Coast.
I was gone.
And when I went out, there was this chess match going on between an IBM computer.
Oh, yes.
And Gary Kasparov.
Yeah.
Who won?
Well, Kasparov won the series.
Did he?
Oh, he did win the series.
He had an early defeat.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, they were really scared there for a while.
That's right.
But, I mean, you know, people say it's just a matter of time.
You know, it came pretty darn close.
But this is the best chess player in the world.
Yeah, but it was pretty darn close to losing.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
You're right.
I mean, you know, it's only a matter of time before, you know, the deep thought configuration of computer
um sort of sees him off. Did he win fairly handily towards the bit towards the uh final? It was a close run thing. I think it was. Say again? It was a close run thing. Oh really? Yeah. No kidding, and he gets 400k good for him. I really was not pulling for the computer, I have to say. Well of course it's not, these days, it wouldn't probably just be Kasparov would it would. You know these guys sort of stopped
stop playing they go back you know have a cup of coffee and they huddle with sort of two or three other guys who are experts, and he'll say you know what about. You mean the computer guys or the Kasparov guy? The Kasparov guy. His team? Yeah so you think he talks with his people, I guess? Sefinitely yeah yeah I mean that's what they do in international grandmaster tournaments anyway. They'll huddle with sort of
people you know their seconds and that. Yeah but the reason I raise this issue, uh because you point this out in your book, and of course it was a faint there. It was pretty successful. I did think that that this thing hinged on the chess game. Yeah or it didn't do? It was just a an irrelevant amusement for the computer right? Yeah exactly.
And I said, there's no way, and especially when I did jump at the back and I saw you had your own game in it, I said, there's no way this guy's going to beat this computer.
Or if he does, it's going to have no relevance whatsoever in the outcome.
It just seemed a nice philosophical irony that the computer could have taken the concept of the game to its ultimate stage.
Well, single combat, you know, that whole concept of single combat, you know, David and Goliath, where the whole outcome of the war is going to depend on these two people who go out and go one-on-one.
Yeah.
And I don't know if you saw it that way when you wrote it, but it's kind of almost a satire on that in a way.
Yeah, well, that's right.
I did have...
Well, I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Well, it was fun.
Let me just think.
We can wrap up shortly if you want.
How solid is the science in here?
How solid?
I mean, did you take steps to... Well, as far as the architecture is concerned and the details of the building, I mean, they're really solid.
I mean, I had a couple of friends who were architects sort of giving me advice.
Do we do have parties that steam clean your ass, though?
Well, in fact, yes.
I was in Japan the year before last, and I was rather astonished to go into a toilet in a friend's house, and it was the first time I'd ever sat down and picked up a laminated set of instructions on how to use the toilet.
How to take a crap, right?
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, you think, well, that's something you ought to know by, you know, get to 14, I think, well, you've got to.
But, no, it wasn't so very different from what was put there, and...
So I just sort of, you know, kind of let my imagination run a bit.
But they do have little, you know, it's a paper-free toilet.
That is genuine.
I've got to tell you, my favorite line, you can guess it in the context here.
Which one?
Tell me.
What kind of one?
Exactly.
Is that something you picked up out there or what?
No, it just sort of, it just tickled me, the idea of this cop.
It seems like the sort of thing a cop would say, actually.
Don't think I haven't used that a couple of times.
Okay, so the next novel is done.
I guess, did we finish the idea, though, that you do see yourself as an entertainer?
Yeah.
You have no illusions that this is commercial fiction, right?
This is commercial fiction.
I like to think, you know, I can...